>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 18: IN
FRANCE, A SUSPECTED RADICAL
ISLAMIST TRIES TO SHOOT
TRAVELERS AT A BUSY AIRPORT BUT
IS THWARTED BY SOLDIERS; THE
UNITED STATES AND CHINA TALK
ABOUT WORKING TOGETHER TO REIN
IN NORTH KOREA; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, "NEWTOWN,"
THE FILM THAT SHOWS HOW A TOWN
STRUCK BY A TRAGIC MASS SHOOTING
HAS COME TO EMBODY RESILIENCE.
>> THAT HADN'T REALLY BEEN DONE,
TO LOOK AT THE RIPPLE EFFECTS
AND THE DEVASTATING TRAUMA TO AN
ENTIRE TOWN.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A MAN WHO TRIED TO GRAB A
MILITARY ASSAULT RIFLE FROM A
SOLDIER ON PATROL AT THE ORLY
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT OUTSIDE
PARIS TODAY INTENDED TO SHOOT
AND KILL TRAVELERS.
PROSECUTOR FRANCOIS MOLINS TOLD
REPORTERS TONIGHT THE WOULD-BE
ATTACKER HELD A HANDGUN TO THE
SOLDIER'S HEAD AND WRESTLED AWAY
HER RIFLE BEFORE YELLING THAT HE
WANTED TO DIE IN THE NAME OF
ALLAH.
THE SUSPECT ALLEGEDLY SAID,
"WHATEVER HAPPENS, THERE WILL BE
DEATHS."
OTHER SOLDIERS SHOT AND KILLED
THE SUSPECT, A 39-YEAR-OLD
FRENCH CITIZEN BORN IN PARIS,
BEFORE HE COULD HURT ANYONE.
PROSECUTOR MOLINS SAID THE
SUSPECT WAS CARRYING A GASOLINE
CAN HE TOSSED TO THE GROUND AND
A KORAN, AND THAT HE HAD BEEN
FLAGGED FOR RADICALIZATION
DURING A PRISON TERM.
THE AUTHORITIES EVACUATED 3,000
TRAVELERS TO SEARCH THE TERMINAL
FOR EXPLOSIVES-- NONE WERE
FOUND-- AND DIVERTED INCOMING
FLIGHTS.
THE ORLY AIRPORT REOPENED FIVE
HOURS LATER.
EARLIER IN THE DAY, POLICE IN
NORTHERN PARIS HAD STOPPED THE
SUSPECT FOR SPEEDING, BUT HE
FLED AFTER FIRING BIRDSHOT AT
THEM.
HE THEN STOLE ANOTHER CAR AND
DROVE TO THE AIRPORT.
SINCE THE TERRORIST ATTACK ON
THE FRENCH SATIRICAL MAGAZINE
"CHARLIE HEBDO" IN JANUARY 2015,
FRANCE HAS DEPLOYED 7,500
COUNTERTERRORISM SOLDIERS TO
BOLSTER POLICE PATROLS.
IN BANGLADESH'S CAPITAL CITY OF
DHAKA TODAY, POLICE AVERTED AN
APPARENT TERRORIST ATTACK WHEN
THEY SHOT AND KILLED A BOMB-
CARRYING MILITANT TRYING TO
BREAK THROUGH A SECURITY
CHECKPOINT ON A MOTORCYCLE.
OFFICIALS SAY THE SUSPECT HAD
SEVERAL BOMBS ATTACHED TO HIS
BODY, WHICH TECHNICIANS LATER
DETONATED SAFELY.
YESTERDAY, A SUICIDE BOMBER BLEW
HIMSELF UP AT A POLICE BASE NEAR
DHAKA'S INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT.
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, OR
ISIS, CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THAT ATTACK, AS WELL AS LAST
JULY'S ATTACK ON A DHAKA CAFE
THAT KILLED 17 PEOPLE.
ON HIS FIRST TRIP TO ASIA AS
SECRETARY OF STATE, REX
TILLERSON SAYS THE UNITED STATES
WILL WORK MORE CLOSELY WITH
CHINA TO COUNTER NORTH KOREA'S
NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROGRAM.
TILLERSON MET WITH CHINA'S
FOREIGN MINISTER, WANG YI, TODAY
IN BEIJING AND DISCUSSED
TENSIONS OVER NORTH KOREA,
TAIWAN AND THE SOUTH CHINA SEA.
THE TRIP TO CHINA, NORTH KOREA'S
CHIEF ALLY AND TRADING PARTNER,
CAME A DAY AFTER TILLERSON
WARNED THAT "ALL OPTIONS,"
INCLUDING MILITARY STRIKES, WERE
ON THE TABLE TO STOP NORTH
KOREA'S REGIME FROM OBTAINING
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
BUT TODAY'S TONE WAS MORE
RESTRAINED.
>> WE SHARE A COMMON VIEW AND A
SENSE THAT TENSIONS ON THE
PENINSULA ARE QUITE HIGH RIGHT
NOW AND THAT THINGS HAVE REACHED
A RATHER DANGEROUS LEVEL.
AND WE'VE COMMITTED OURSELVES TO
DOING EVERYTHING WE CAN TO
PREVENT ANY TYPE OF CONFLICT
FROM BREAKING OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: TILLERSON SAID
HE AND WANG AGREED TO TRY TO
PERSUADE NORTH KOREA TO MAKE
WHAT HE CALLED A "COURSE
CORRECTION" AWAY FROM NUCLEAR
WEAPON DEVELOPMENT.
FOREIGN MINISTER WANG SAID THE
SITUATION HAS REACHED A
"CROSSROADS" AND URGED THE U.S.
TO SHOW PATIENCE.
>> (translated): WE HOPE THAT
ALL PARTIES, INCLUDING OUR
AMERICAN FRIENDS, COULD BE COOL-
HEADED AND MAKE WISE CHOICES.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITISH TROOPS
HAVE DEPLOYED TO ESTONIA TO
BOLSTER DEFENSES AND DETER
RUSSIA IN EASTERN EUROPE.
THE FIRST 120 OF 800 TROOPS,
WITH THEIR TANKS AND ARMORED
VEHICLES, ARRIVED LAST NIGHT AT
A BASE OUTSIDE THE CAPITAL OF
TALLIN.
THE REST ARE EXPECTED NEXT MONTH
IN THE TINY BALTIC COUNTRY, A
FORMER SOVIET REPUBLIC AND
CURRENT NATO ALLY THAT SHARES A
BORDER WITH RUSSIA.
BRITAIN'S DEFENSE SECRETARY SAYS
THE DEPLOYMENT IS IN RESPONSE TO
"INCREASED RUSSIAN AGGRESSION"
BUT IS NOT "DESIGNED TO PROVOKE
OR ESCALATE."
TODAY MARKS THE THIRD
ANNIVERSARY OF RUSSIA'S
ANNEXATION OF UKRAINE'S CRIMEAN
PENINSULA.
THOUSANDS OF AMERICAN TROOPS
DEPLOYED TO POLAND IN JANUARY TO
SHORE UP NATO DEFENSES THERE.
INITIAL DESIGNS FOR THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION'S PROPOSED BORDER
WALL WITH MEXICO ARE DUE IN 11
DAYS.
CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION
HAS POSTED ITS SOLICITATION FOR
EITHER A SOLID CONCRETE WALL OR
ONE WITH "SEE-THROUGH COMPONENT"
ONLINE.
IT SAYS THE 2,000-MILE WALL MUST
BE:
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S BUDGET ASKS
CONGRESS FOR $2.5 BILLION TO
START CONSTRUCTION, PROJECTING A
TOTAL COST OF $12 BILLION.
BUT THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY HAS ESTIMATED IT WILL
COST $10 BILLION MORE THAN THAT.
PRESIDENT TRUMP AND VICE
PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE ARE BOTH
SPENDING THE WEEKEND IN FLORIDA.
VISITING AN ENVELOPE FACTORY IN
JACKSONVILLE TODAY, PENCE TOLD A
GROUP OF SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS
THE REPUBLICAN PLAN TO REPLACE
OBAMACARE WOULD DELIVER
AFFORDABLE, HIGH QUALITY CARE
THAT IS "ACCESSIBLE FOR EVERY
AMERICAN."
THIS WEEK, HOWEVER, THE
NONPARTISAN CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET
OFFICE FORECAST THE REPUBLICAN
PLAN COULD RESULT IN 24 MILLION
AMERICANS LOSING THEIR HEALTH
INSURANCE.
PENCE GOES ON TO FORT LAUDERDALE
AND PALM BEACH, WHERE THE
PRESIDENT IS ONCE AGAIN AT HIS
MAR-A-LAGO CLUB, WITH NO PUBLIC
EVENTS SCHEDULED.
ABORTION RIGHTS ADVOCATES ARE
APPLAUDING A FEDERAL COURT
RULING THAT WILL KEEP
MISSISSIPPI'S ONLY ABORTION
CLINIC OPEN.
YESTERDAY'S RULING PERMANENTLY
BLOCKED A LAW THAT WOULD HAVE
REQUIRED ALL DOCTORS WORKING IN
THE CLINIC TO HAVE ADMITTING
PRIVILEGES AT A LOCAL HOSPITAL.
THE SUPREME COURT RULED EIGHT
MONTHS AGO THAT A SIMILAR LAW IN
TEXAS WAS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE
RIGHTS SAID:
NO COMMENTS FROM MISSISSIPPI'S
GOVERNOR, WHO SIGNED THE LAW IN
2012, WHICH NEVER TOOK EFFECT.
>> Sreenivasan: READ ABOUT 100
PUERTO RICAN ARTISTS WHO'VE PUT
ON A MULTIMEDIA EXHIBIT ABOUT
THE ISLAND, AND THE COMPLEXITIES
OF BEING U.S. CITIZENS.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: HOMS, SYRIA IS
WHERE THE UPRISING AGAINST
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASSAD BEGAN
IN 2011.
TODAY, THE FIRST OF THOUSANDS OF
OPPOSITION FIGHTERS AND THEIR
FAMILIES BEGAN EVACUATING THE
LAST REBEL-HELD NEIGHBORHOODS.
THEY'RE LEAVING AS PART OF A
DEAL BROKERED BY RUSSIA, WHICH
BACKS PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASSAD.
AS THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR ENTERED
ITS SEVENTH YEAR THIS WEEK, THE
AMERICAN MILITARY PRESENCE IS
HIGHER THAN EVER BEFORE, WITH
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION SENDING
400 MORE TROOPS TO JOIN 500
ALREADY DEPLOYED.
FOR MORE PERSPECTIVE ON WHAT'S
HAPPENING ON THE GROUND AND THE
ROLE OF THE U.S. MILITARY, I AM
JOINED FROM WASHINGTON BY DOUG
OLLIVANT OF THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION.
DOUG, HALF A MILLION PEOPLE
DEAD, GETTING INTO SEVEN YEARS
NOW, MILLIONS MORE DISPLACED.
ANY END IN SIGHT?
>> UNFORTUNATELY, NO.
IT DOESN'T APPEAR THAT WE REALLY
DO HAVE AN END IN SIGHT.
WE SEE TALKS OF CEASE FIRES AND
TALKS OF TRUCES, AND, YOU KNOW,
THE OCCASIONAL PEACE TALK, BUT
NOTHING SEEMS TO HAVE COME FROM
THIS.
THE RUSSIANS ARE VERY MUCH
VESTED IN THE SURVIVAL OF THE
ASSAD REGIME, SO THAT SEEMS TO
BE A SIMPLE FACT ON THE GROUND.
AND YET THE REBELLION HASN'T
GONE AWAY, AND NEITHER HAVE
EITHER AL QAEDA OR ISIS.
IT'S COMPLICATED.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HE HAS
TIME ON HIS SIDE.
HE DOESN'T SEEM TO FEEL ANY
PRESSURE TO TRY TO RESOLVE THIS
ANY SOONER THAN NEEDED?
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
HE'S VERY SECURE IN DAMASCUS, SO
THE BATTLE MAY WAX AND WANE OUT
IN THE FIELD, BUT HE'S UNDER NO
PARTICULAR PRESSURE WHERE HE IS.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK
ABOUT THIS IDEA THAT THE U.S.
HAS A, KIND OF A PLAN TO TACKLE
ISIS IN IRAQ AND OTHER PLACES,
AND ALSO IN SYRIA.
WHAT ARE ALL THESE ADDITIONAL
TROOPS GOING TO DO ON THE
GROUND?
>> WELL, THE ADDITIONAL TROOPS
IN SYRIA ARE THERE TO DO ABOUT
THREE THINGS: THEY'RE THERE TO
ADVISE, AS THEY'VE BEEN DOING ON
THE IRAQI SIDE OF THE BORDER.
THEY'RE THERE TO PROVIDE FIRE
SUPPORT.
THERE ARE HOWITZERS AT THIS
BASE WHICH CAN REACH RAQQA, OR
AT LEAST THE OUTSKIRTS OF RAQQA.
THAT'S ALSO SOMETHING THAT'S
BEEN DONE IN IRAQ, SO THAT'S A
PROVEN MODEL.
BUT UNLIKE IN IRAQ, THESE TROOPS
ARE THERE, AT LEAST IN SOME
PART, TO KEEP OUR ALLIES FROM
FIGHTING EACH OTHER.
THEY'RE ESSENTIALLY POSITIONED
BETWEEN THE TURKISH-BACKED ARAB
FORCES AND THE KURDISH FORCES,
BOTH OF WHICH WOULD PROBABLY
MUCH RATHER FIGHT EACH OTHER
THAN FIGHT ISIS.
>> Sreenivasan: TAKING A CITY
LIKE RAQQA IS GOING TO TAKE
QUITE SOME TIME, AND WHAT WE'RE
SEEING IN MOSUL PLAY OUT, I'D
IMAGINE IT WOULD BE JUST AS
HARD, IF NOT HARDER IN RAQQA.
>> IT'LL BE HARDER.
RAQQA IS A SMALLER CITY THAN
MOSUL, SO IN THAT SENSE IT'S
EASIER.
BUT IN IRAQ WE'RE BLESSED WITH
AN ABUNDANCE OF REAL, ORGANIZED
ALLIES.
WE HAVE THE IRAQI ARMY AND ITS
ASSOCIATED FORCES.
WE HAVE THE KURDISH PESHMERGA
AND WE CAN EVEN WORK WITH THE,
THE PRIVATE MILITARY FORCES,
THE P.M.U.s OR SHIA MILITIAS.
SO WE ESSENTIALLY HAVE THREE
ORGANIZED FORCES IN THAT COUNTRY
THAT WE CAN USE AS A FIGHTING
FORCE.
IN SYRIA, WE REALLY DON'T HAVE
ANY OF THOSE THINGS.
WE DO HAVE THE Y.P.G. SYRIAN
KURDS, BUT THAT'S A FORCE THAT
WE ESSENTIALLY ORGANIZED.
IT DIDN'T ORGANIZE ITSELF, AS
THE IRAQI PESHMERGA DID, SO WE
HAVE BEEN ESSENTIALLY CREATING
THAT FROM SCRATCH OVER THE LAST
SEVERAL YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW STRONG IS
AL QAEDA IN SYRIA TODAY?
>> WELL, AL QAEDA HAS CONTINUED
TO GAIN STRENGTH.
ALL THE EXTREMIST FACTIONS--
ISIS, AL QAEDA IN SYRIA, WHICH
HAS GONE THROUGH VARIOUS NAMES.
TODAY IT'S CALLED TAHRIR AL
SHAM, BUT AL QAEDA IN SYRIA IS
STILL JUST FINE.
AND FOR THAT MATTER, AHRAR AL
SHAM, WHICH DOESN'T INTEND TO
IMPOSE ISLAM ON US.
THEY'RE NOT LIKE AL QAEDA OR
ISIS IN THAT SENSE, BUT THEY'RE
ESSENTIALLY THE SYRIAN TALIBAN.
THEY WANT A VERY ISLAMIST REGIME
IN THE COUNTRY.
ALL THREE OF THESE GROUPS HAVE
ESSENTIALLY GOBBLED UP THE
SMALLER GROUPS.
THEY HAVE MORE RESOURCES AND,
THEREFORE, THE FIGHTERS HAVE
MOVED FROM THE MORE MODERATE
RESISTANCE GROUPS TO THESE MORE
ISLAMIST GROUPS.
>> Sreenivasan: CONSIDERING
HOW MANY DIFFERENT FACTIONS ARE
FIGHTING INSIDE SYRIA AND THE
DIFFERENT AGENDAS ALL OF THEM
HAVE, DO THE MAJOR PLAYERS--
SAY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE U.S. AND
RUSSIA-- CAN THEY POSSIBLY AGREE
ON ACTUALLY FIGHTING ISIS AND
AL QAEDA, VERSUS SUPPORTING OR
NOT SUPPORTING ASSAD?
>> IT'S VERY, VERY DIFFICULT.
ULTIMATELY, GETTING RID OF ISIS
IS EVERYONE'S GOAL.
IT'S THE-- NOT JUST THE
AMERICANS AND THE RUSSIANS, BUT
EVEN, SAY, THE SAUDIS AND THE
IRANIANS, ALSO MAJOR PLAYERS IN
THE REGION, AND THE TURKS, WOULD
ALL LIKE ISIS TO GO AWAY.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER EQUITIES,
AND EXACTLY HOW YOU WANT THE
CHESS BOARD TO LOOK ONCE ISIS IS
GONE, ON THAT, THERE'S NO
AGREEMENT BETWEEN ANY OF THE
MAJOR POWERS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IN THE
MEANTIME, THE HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS CONTINUES.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AS YOU SAID, HALF A MILLION
DEAD, TENS OF MILLIONS WHO HAVE
BEEN DISBURSED, MANY OF WHOM
HAVE, YOU KNOW, DROWNED IN THE
MEDITERR-- IN ONE OF THE OCEANS,
OR HAVE BEEN PICKED UP BY HUMAN
TRAFFICKERS AND SUBJECTED TO
VARIOUS INDIGNITIES OR DEATH.
IT'S A TRUE HUMANITARIAN
TRAGEDY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND CONTINUING
TO ADD PRESSURE ON ALL THE
COUNTRIES NEIGHBORING SYRIA AS
WELL.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IN COUNTRIES THAT DON'T HAVE
MUCH STABILITY TO BEGIN WITH,
PLACES LIKE OUR ALLY JORDAN,
LIKE LEBANON, TURKEY-- THEY'VE
ALL RECEIVED LITERALLY MILLIONS
OF REFUGEES, AS HAS EUROPE, AND
NONE OF THIS IS HELPFUL FOR
ANYONE'S POLITICAL SITUATION,
AND IN THE CASE OF THE
NEIGHBORS, EVEN REGIME SURVIVAL.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DOUG OLLIVANT OF THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> PLEASURE, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: A DOCUMENTARY
CALLED "NEWTOWN," PREMIERING ON
THE PBS PROGRAM "INDEPENDENT
LENS" ON APRIL 3, EXPLORES THE
AFTERMATH OF THE MASS SHOOTING
AT SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY IN
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT, IN 2012.
ON THAT DAY, A DISTURBED 20-
YEAR-OLD MAN ENTERED THE SCHOOL
WITH A MILITARY-STYLE SEMI-
AUTOMATIC RIFLE AND, IN LESS
THAN EIGHT MINUTES, HE FIRED 154
SHOTS, KILLING SIX ADULTS AND 20
CHILDREN-- ALL FIRST GRADERS--
BEFORE KILLING HIMSELF WITH A
HANDGUN.
AS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S SASKIA DE
MELKER REPORTS, THE DOCUMENTARY
WEAVES TOGETHER THE EXPERIENCES
OF THE FAMILIES AND MANY OTHER
NEWTOWN RESIDENTS AFFECTED BY
THE TRAGEDY.
>> Reporter: THE DOCUMENTARY
"NEWTOWN" SHOWS HOW THE TRAGEDY
HAS SHAPED NOT ONLY THE VICTIMS
BUT THE WHOLE TOWN.
FILMMAKER KIM SNYDER SPENT THREE
YEARS MAKING THE FILM.
YOU SPEAK WITH A NUMBER OF
PEOPLE FROM THE COMMUNITY IN THE
FILM-- THE NEXT-DOOR NEIGHBOR AT
SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY, A PRIEST
IN THE COMMUNITY.
WHY DID YOU TAKE THIS APPROACH
OF LOOKING AT THE ENTIRE
COMMUNITY?
>> WE FELT IT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT, THAT THAT HADN'T
REALLY BEEN DONE, TO LOOK AT THE
RIPPLE EFFECTS AND THE
DEVASTATING TRAUMA TO AN ENTIRE
TOWN, TO AN ENTIRE COMMUNITY;
THE EFFECTS ON NOT JUST FAMILY
MEMBERS WHO LOSE SO MUCH, BUT ON
NEIGHBORS AND ON DOCTORS AND ON
PRIESTS AND OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND OUR TEACHERS.
AND FROM THERE EVOLVED A SORT OF
VISION TO SHOW THROUGH MULTIPLE
LENSES WHAT REDEFINING VICTIM AS
AN ENTIRE COMMUNITY, WHICH IS
SOMETHING WE DON'T ALWAYS SEE.
>> WE CAN'T GO BACK TO THAT--
>> Reporter: RIGHT AFTER THE
INCIDENT, SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY
NEIGHBOR GENE ROSEN ENCOUNTERED
A GROUP OF EVACUATED SCHOOL KIDS
ON HIS FRONT LAWN.
>> THEY LOOKED HORRIBLE.
THEY WERE OUT OF BREATH.
I COULD TELL THEY HAD BEEN
CRYING, BUT THEY WERE QUIET.
THEY WERE QUIET IN THEIR ABJECT
FEAR AND TERROR.
>> NEWTOWN IS 28,000 PEOPLE, AND
THIS WAS A SAMPLING OF CERTAIN
VOICES THAT WE GOT TO
ORGANICALLY, WHERE ONE PERSON
WOULD INTRODUCE US TO ANOTHER IN
A VERY PRIVATE WAY.
BUT THERE WASN'T ANYONE THAT I
MET WHO WASN'T COMPLETELY
EXPERIENCING VARYING LEVELS OF
TRAUMA, EVEN YEARS OUT.
>> Reporter: MARK BARDEN TALKS
ABOUT LOSING HIS SON, DANIEL.
>> YOU CAN ONLY TRY TO IMAGINE
HOW UNBELIEVABLY DIFFICULT AND
CHALLENGING THAT IS, TO TRY TO
INTERPRET WHAT YOUR SEVEN-YEAR-
OLD EXPERIENCED AS HE WAS BEING
MURDERED.
>> AND LIKE SO MANY PARENTS--
>> Reporter: MELISSA MALIN IS
MARK BARDEN'S NEXT-DOOR
NEIGHBOR.
HER SON, KYLE, WAS IN THE
CLASSROOM DOWN THE HALL FROM
DANIEL AND ESCAPED UNHARMED.
>> THIS GUY WALKED INTO THE
SCHOOL, AND HE WENT LEFT.
WHY DID HE GO LEFT?
KYLE WAS ON THE RIGHT, THE
SECOND DOOR ON THE RIGHT.
YOU KNOW, WHY DID HE GO THIS WAY
AND NOT THAT WAY?
I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S NOT FAIR.
NONE OF THIS IS FAIR.
>> Reporter: YOU REALLY CAPTURE
NEIGHBORS WHO ARE TRYING TO
RECONCILE THE RANDOM CHAOS OF
THIS EVENT.
>> THE REBUILDING OF THAT
COMMUNITY IS SORT OF RECONCILING
THESE RELATIONSHIPS OF PEOPLE
JUST FEELING SO TERRIBLE FOR
THEIR FRIENDS OR NEIGHBORS WHO
DID LOSE CHILDREN.
BUT AT THE SAME TOKEN, THERE ARE
PEOPLE... THERE WERE 300-SOME
CHILDREN IN THE SCHOOL THAT DAY,
AND MANY OF THEM SAW THINGS AND
ALL OF THEM HEARD THINGS THAT
I'M SURE THEY WILL NEVER FORGET.
AND SO THOSE FAMILIES GO THROUGH
VERY DIFFICULT JOURNEYS RIGHT
NOW WITH THEIR SURVIVING
CHILDREN.
SO THERE'S ALSO, I THINK, PART
OF THE FILM WAS TO OPEN UP THE
NEED TO HAVE EMPATHY FOR ALL
KINDS OF DIFFERENT PEOPLE IN THE
TOWN.
>> Reporter: HAS THIS TRAGEDY
DEFINED THIS COMMUNITY?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT THEY
WOULD SAY THEY DON'T WANT TO BE
DEFINED BY, THE TRAGEDY.
BUT HAVING SAID THAT, IT'S A
TOWN THAT WILL BE FOREVER
CHANGED.
IT'S SORT OF IN THE D.N.A., I
THINK, OF THE HISTORY OF THE
TOWN NOW FOR GENERATIONS TO
COME.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT ANY OF US
THAT WERE IN THERE FEEL THAT
ANYBODY NEEDS TO KNOW,
SPECIFICALLY, WHAT WE SAW.
EMOTIONALLY, THE WORLD NEEDS TO
KNOW, TO UNDERSTAND IT.
>> WE WANT PEOPLE TO BEAR
WITNESS TO THIS AND TO HAVE THE
BACKS OF NOT ONLY THE PEOPLE IN
NEWTOWN WHO WENT THROUGH THIS,
BUT THIS SORT OF EPIDEMIC OF ALL
THESE PEOPLE, THAT I THINK WE'RE
BECOMING AT LARGE A TRAUMATIZED
SOCIETY FROM ALL OF THESE GUN
DEATHS, AND TO DECIDE FOR
THEMSELVES, WHAT DO WE WANT TO
DO ABOUT THIS?
>> Reporter: THE FILM SHOWS THE
EFFORTS OF SOME NEWTOWN
FAMILIES, AS PART OF THE GROUP
CALLED SANDY HOOK PROMISE, TO
PUSH FOR STRICTER BACKGROUND
CHECKS FOR GUN BUYERS AND FOR
BANNING SEMI-AUTOMATIC RIFLES
AND HIGH CAPACITY MAGAZINES,
LIKE THOSE USED ON THEIR
CHILDREN.
AS A RESULT, CONNECTICUT CHANGED
ITS GUN LAWS, BUT, ALONG WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA, THE FAMILIES
FAILED TO PERSUADE CONGRESS TO
ACT ON AN EXPANDED BACKGROUND
CHECK BILL.
>> SOME OF THEM WERE TRYING TO
MAKE CHANGE IN TERMS OF SOCIAL
ACTION.
OTHERS WERE HAVING ALL KINDS OF
PERSONAL TRANSFORMATIONS.
AND REALLY, I THINK THE FILM IS
AS MUCH ABOUT RESILIENCE, HUMAN
RESILIENCE AND COLLECTIVE GRIEF
AS IT IS ABOUT THE ISSUES THAT
UNDERLIE GUN VIOLENCE.
WE'VE SCREENED IN VERY
POLITICALLY DIVERSE PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY.
WE'VE HAD N.R.A. MEMBERS COME;
JUST SEVERAL DAYS AGO, HAD A
CONVERSATION WITH A FEW WHO HAVE
SEEN THE FILM AND SAID, THIS IS
A REALLY IMPORTANT FILM, AND WE
ALL NEED TO BE ABLE TO TALK
ABOUT THIS IN A MORE CIVIL WAY.
SO THAT'S BEEN INCREDIBLY
INSPIRING.
>> Reporter: ON THE FILM'S WEB
SITE, SNYDER POINTS VIEWERS TO
SANDY HOOK PROMISE AND THE PRO-
GUN CONTROL BRADY CAMPAIGN TO
PREVENT GUN VIOLENCE AND
EVERYTOWN FOR GUN SAFETY.
THE PRO-GUN RIGHTS NATIONAL
RIFLE ASSOCIATION DECLINED TO
COMMENT ON THE FILM OR SANDY
HOOK PROMISE, BUT THE PRO-GUN
INDUSTRY NATIONAL SHOOTING
SPORTS FOUNDATION, WHICH HAS
LONG BEEN HEADQUARTERED IN
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT, TOLD
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND:
WHILE OPPOSING A BAN ON SEMI-
AUTOMATIC RIFLE GUNS OR HIGH
CAPACITY MAGAZINES, THE
FOUNDATION SAYS IT "HAS LONG
WORKED TO HELP KEEP FIREARMS OUT
OF THE HANDS OF INDIVIDUALS WHO
SHOULD NOT HAVE ACCESS TO THEM."
THAT'S INCLUDED PUSHING STATES
TO SEND COMPLETE CRIMINAL OR
MENTAL HEALTH RECORDS FOR
EVERYONE BANNED FROM BUYING
GUNS TO THE FEDERAL BACKGROUND
CHECK SYSTEM.
YOU DON'T EVER SAY THE SHOOTER'S
NAME IN THE FILM.
WHY?
>> MY SENSE OF IT WAS THAT THOSE
PEOPLE WHO PERPETRATE THESE
KINDS OF CRIMES ARE GIVEN A LOT
OF NOTORIETY.
AND SO WE REALLY WANTED TO TAKE
THE LEAD OF A LOT OF VICTIM
COMMUNITIES NOT TO GIVE AS MUCH
NOTORIETY TO THE SHOOTERS, BUT
TO REALLY FOCUS MORE ON THE
PEOPLE WHOSE LIVES WERE TAKEN,
ON THE LOSS AND ON THE EFFECT ON
THE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: DID YOU EVER
CONSIDER TALKING TO ANYONE FROM
THE SHOOTER'S FAMILY AS A MEMBER
OF THE COMMUNITY?
>> I DID, QUITE HONESTLY.
THE SHOOTER'S FATHER HAD GIVEN
AN INTERVIEW THAT GOT OUT THERE
IN PRINT, BUT I-- YOU KNOW, HE
HAD MOVED AWAY FROM NEWTOWN.
HE REALLY WASN'T CURRENTLY A
MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: IN THE FILM, NICOLE
HOCKLEY TALKS ABOUT HER SIX-
YEAR-OLD SON, DYLAN, WHO DIED AT
SANDY HOOK ELEMENTARY.
>> I HAVE THESE MEMORIES.
I HAVE THESE PICTURES.
I HAVE HAIR AND TEETH.
AND YET, YOU GO THROUGH THESE
CRAZY MOTIONS OF "AM I JUST
DREAMING ALL OF THIS?"
( SINGING )
I STILL KEEP EXPECTING HIM TO BE
THERE, BUT HAVE I JUST GONE
INSANE?
IS THIS REAL?
>> Reporter: SEVERAL OF THE
PARENTS EXPRESS THAT THEY DON'T
REALLY WANT CLOSURE BECAUSE THAT
MEANS THAT THEIR CHILD IS REALLY
GONE.
HOW DID YOU DECIDE WHEN TO STOP
FILMING OR HOW TO END THIS FILM
WHEN THERE'S NOT REALLY AN END
FOR THIS COMMUNITY?
>> IT WAS REALLY IMPORTANT FOR
US TO STAY HONEST TO THE FACT
THAT THERE IS NO CLOSURE AND YOU
DON'T GET OVER THIS.
IT DOES GO ON.
WE FELT WE HAD GOTTEN A CERTAIN
AMOUNT OF PERSPECTIVES OVER THE
THREE YEARS, AND THAT WE HAD
THAT STORY.
AND THERE WAS ENOUGH SHIFTS,
THERE WERE ENOUGH SMALL BABY
STEP KINDS OF SHIFTS IN SOME OF
THE PEOPLE THAT WE WERE INVOLVED
WITH.
AND SO MUCH WAS REALLY ABOUT
CHRONICLING THE BEGINNINGS OF,
OR THE MAKINGS OF RESILIENCE,
MORE THAN HEALING.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
ROCK 'N ROLL LEGEND CHUCK BERRY
HAS DIED.
POLICE IN ST. CHARLES COUNTY,
MISSOURI, SAY BERRY WAS FOUND
UNRESPONSIVE AND COULD NOT BE
REVIVED AT HIS HOME TODAY.
BERRY IS ONE OF THE PIONEERS OF
ROCK, A GUITARIST BEST KNOWN FOR
COMPOSITIONS LIKE "JOHNNY BE
GOOD," "MABELLINE," "ROLL OVER
BEETHOVEN," "NO PARTICULAR PLACE
TO GO," AND MANY MORE.
CHUCK BERRY WAS 90 YEARS OLD.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.